---
source: https://www.jointjs.com/bpmn-modeling-tools
generated: 2026-06-19
format: plaintext
---

Build a production-grade BPMN modeler — without the bpmn-js constraints

Most teams reach for bpmn-js and hit the same wall: a mandatory watermark, limited customization, and Camunda-only defaults. JointJS is the alternative built for production apps.

Start free trial

talk to us

Your BPMN modeler,  90% built

Kickstart your development with a ready-to-use template.

[open demo

](https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/63061d4ee85b5a18644f221c%2F6a0eae74122aa70291257098_BPMN-editor-UI_mp4.mp4)

BOiLERPLATE

BPMN EDITOR UI

The JointJS BPMN editor demo is a fully working starting point: complete BPMN 2.0 shapes, drag-and-drop palette, property editor, minimap, and bidirectional XML import/export included. Trim it to your use case, wire up your execution engine, and ship.

Get started on your framework

JavascriptReactAngularVueSvelte

more demos

BPMN apps & examples

Production-ready examples you can clone and adapt to your stack.

explore demos

Use cases

Who builds BPMN modelers with JointJS

BPMN is used across industries to model, document, and automate business processes. JointJS is the foundation teams choose when the modeler needs to be embedded, branded, and tailored to their domain.

BPMN and other workflow engine integrations

Build a branded BPMN modeler embedded in your product that deploys directly to Camunda, Flowable, or any other BPMN-compliant engine via API, with engine-specific properties configured in the UI, not raw XML.

Compliance and process documentation

In healthcare, finance, and insurance, BPMN diagrams serve audit and compliance functions. JointJS lets teams build modelers that integrate with internal systems, enforce design standards, and control exactly what gets exported and where.

BPMN modeling as a product feature

Embed a fully branded BPMN modeler inside your SaaS product, with only the elements your users need, in a UI that matches the rest of your application.

Domain-specific process editors

Industries like logistics, insurance, and telecom need BPMN as a foundation with custom shapes, predefined task types, and domain-specific terminology. JointJS gives you the full rendering engine and the freedom to build on top of it.

customer story

Trusted by global leaders

“Access to JointJS+ BPMN demo source code and very good documentation is outstanding in the market. We saved many hours and trouble thanks to easy debugging and well-written code, with an easy-to-understand structure and naming.”

Oleksandr Klymenko

Product Development Architect

read customer story

Features

What JointJS+ gives you out of the box

Full BPMN 2.0 shape library

The complete set of BPMN 2.0 symbols, from events and gateways to pools, lanes, and artifacts. Render and import any standard BPMN diagram without gaps.

No watermark

Ship your BPMN modeler fully branded as your own, with no third-party attribution on rendered diagrams.

Bidirectional BPMN 2.0 XML

Import and export valid BPMN 2.0 XML consumable by any compliant execution engine. Engine-specific extensions are handled explicitly to survive the round trip.

Virtual rendering for large diagrams

JointJS renders only the elements visible in the viewport, so performance holds steady across diagrams with hundreds of elements.

Configurable element palette

Restrict the palette to exactly the elements your users need, while keeping the full shape library available for import and rendering.

Contextual property editor

A fully integrated property editor that updates based on selection, with configurable fields, validation, conditional visibility, and grouping. Extensible to any engine-specific properties.

BPMN-aware constraints

Semantic rules like pool containment, sequence flow restrictions, and boundary event attachment are enforced at interaction time, guiding users toward valid processes.

Compound undo/redo

Every action, including cascading deletions across pools, lanes, and attached elements, is reversed as a single atomic operation.

comparison

JointJS is the alternative when default isn't enough.

Free and widely used, bpmn-js is often the first choice — until teams hit its watermark requirement, Camunda-specific defaults, and customization ceiling. Here's how the two libraries compare.

Feature

License model

Watermark requirement

Execution engine support

BPMN 2.0 shape library

Virtual rendering (large diagrams)

Touch and tablet support

Customizability

Automatic layout algorithms

Comprehensive documentation

Large collection of demos

Flexibility beyond BPMN

Commercial support

Commercial

None

Engine-agnostic

Full

Yes

Yes

Full control

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes — with SLA

bpmn-js

Open source (watermark clause)

Mandatory — cannot be removed

Camunda-first defaults

full

No

Removed in v17 (2024)

Moderate

No

No

No

No

Community only

When JointJS makes sense

Customer-facing product, no third-party watermarks
Full UI and branding control
Support for non-Camunda or multiple engines
Performance at scale with large diagrams
Expert technical support required

When bpmn-js makes sense

A visible watermark is acceptable
Camunda-only with its built-in defaults
Low to moderate diagram sizes

ROI analysis: See how much JointJS+ saves you

What will your savings be in 3 years? We compared two scenarios, building a custom canvas from scratch versus shipping on JointJS+, to find out.

Get the roi calculation

Social proof

What engineering teams say

“ JointJS+ was really a great find, as it gave us a great boost in the diagramming frontend of our application. These guys know their business and give you a great support on your development. One of our requirements was to have a BPMN diagram support in our app and they quickly supplied this as a plugin to JointJS+! ”

José Miguel Gonçalves

Project Manager, inov

“ We needed to make some tweaks like customizing the connections of the elements — our requirement was to have custom routing and sophisticated layering of connections which required logical connections spanning several physical connections. Here we could always count on JointJS+ together with great support. ”

Bartek Waśko

Senior Software Engineer, ConSol

Content hub

The BPMN modeler engineering guide

Visit blog

[## BPMN modeling vs execution: Why editors and engines are decoupled

Zbyněk Stara

Feb 18, 2026

Explore how BPMN 2.0 separates process semantics from diagram presentation, enabling decoupled modeling UIs and execution engines like Camunda and Flowable.

BPMN](/blog/bpmn-modeling-vs-execution)

Read article

Zbyněk Stara

Jun 9, 2026

[### JointJS vs bpmn-js: A technical comparison for production BPMN modeling tools

JointJS and bpmn-js are the two leading JavaScript libraries for creating custom BPMN modeling UIs on the Web. Which one should you choose for your project?

BPMN](/blog/jointjs-vs-bpmn-js-technical-comparison-for-production-bpmn-editors)

Read article

Zbyněk Stara

Mar 16, 2026

[### What makes a good BPMN modeler UI? A practical feature checklist

Find out what separates a production-ready BPMN modeler UI from a merely functional one — with a practical ten-feature checklist covering BPMN shape library, link routing, process validation, and XML round-trip safety.

BPMN](/blog/bpmn-modeler-ui-feature-checklist)

Read article

David Durman

Feb 20, 2026

[### How to build a custom BPMN modeler UI for Camunda

A step-by-step guide to connecting a custom BPMN editor to Camunda, covering XML enrichment, Zeebe extensions, and import/export pipelines.

BPMN](/blog/how-to-build-custom-bpmn-modeler-ui-for-camunda)

Read article