---
source: https://www.jointjs.com/blog/demo-wednesday-parametric-diagram
generated: 2026-03-28
format: plaintext
---

We've published a new demo: SysML Parametric Diagram (PAR)

Systems Modeling Language (SysML) is a general-purpose modeling language that is used for systems engineering. It extends the Unified Modeling Language (UML) to include additional diagram types and semantics that are useful for modeling complex systems. SysML is designed to support the specification, analysis, design, verification, and validation of a wide range of systems, including hardware, software, information, processes, personnel, and facilities.

A parametric diagram (PAR) is a type of diagram in the SysML that focuses on modeling the relationships between parameters of elements in a system. Parameters in this context refer to values or variables that define certain characteristics of system components. These characteristics might include attributes like speed, weight, cost, etc. Parametric diagrams are particularly useful in analyzing and predicting system behavior in response to changes in these parameters.

In a parametric diagram, you can represent mathematical expressions and constraints that define the relationships between parameters. This allows you to perform various types of analyses, such as:

Sensitivity analysis (how changes in parameters affect system behavior)
Trade-off analysis (finding the best combination of parameters to meet certain criteria)
Optimization (finding the best values for parameters to achieve specific objectives).

In summary, parametric diagrams in SysML provide a powerful tool for modeling and analyzing the quantitative aspects of a system, allowing engineers and designers to make informed decisions about system design and performance.

See the Pen JointJS+: SysML Parametric Diagram (PAR) by JointJS (@jointjs)
on CodePen.

‍

Every Wednesday we share diagramming tips, interesting features and news in JointJS. Learn with us, get content delivered straight to your inbox and become a real diagramming pro: