---
source: https://www.jointjs.com/blog/new-brand-to-be-revealed-jointjsplus-replaces-rappid
generated: 2026-03-28
format: plaintext
---

You may have noticed that we have started using JointJS+ in our materials: blog posts, newsletters, websites, documentation, etc. Moreover, the good old Rappid suddenly disappeared. Well, today you'll finally find out what this change indicates and what we're up to.

TLDR: We know you're very busy. If you don't have 2 minutes to read the whole story, read this: We're rebranding from Rappid to JointJS+. The only thing that will change is the brand itself, along with our website and other marketing materials. It won't have any effect on functionality.

2010, when it all started

For those of you interested in the beautiful story, let's continue. In 2010, our founder and CEO David Durman released the open-source library JointJS with a mission to help developers create visual applications more efficiently.

As time went on, more and more developers were using the open-source library, and it became clear that there was an opportunity for further development and growth. That's when David Durman and Roman Brückner, who got excited about the project and joined as a co-founder, came up with Rappid - an extension of JointJS. That year, the company client IO s r.o. was founded.

Why do we make the change?

How does this story correspond with the new brand, you may ask. Back then in 2014 when Rappid was launched, we haven't stopped improving JointJS, the open-source library. On the contrary, we've always thought of JointJS as a great way to give back to the developer community and enable developers to build visual applications and No-Code/Low-Code tools that help non-technical people achieve incredible results.

Today, both Rappid and JointJS are being used by established companies such as Oracle, IBM, Boeing and AirBnB, and thousands of developers. There are hundreds of use cases where our solution can be useful, from BPMN applications, floor planners, workflow automation designers to Kanban or Yamazumi applications.

Yet we found that the two names – JointJS and Rappid – caused confusion. To bring more clarity and avoid confusion, we decided to use the JointJS brand for our open-source library and JointJS+ for the commercial extension (which will replace Rappid).

By the way, if you want to take a look at the evolution of JointJS and Rappid, check out our post listing all the logos and names we've used over the years.

What will be different

It is important to stress that this change will not affect functionality. JointJS+ will provide the same value as Rappid, just under a different name.

Let's go through the key points:

The change will have no impact on the functionality of the framework.
In the coming weeks, we'll be launching a new logo, website, and other supporting materials that clearly outline the benefits of JointJS (open-source) and JointJS+ (a commercial extension with enhanced functionality).
The company behind JointJS and JointJS+ remains unchanged (client IO s.r.o.)
For communication purposes, we'll use emails ending with @jointjs.com.

Our vision for the future

Our vision of the future is best summed up by the answer to a simple question: Where do we want JointJS and JointJS+ to be in 5 to 10 years?

As you may have noticed, we adapt the product a lot to the needs of our customers. That being said, much of the answer will be in your hands, in the hands of our customers and the people who use the open-source library.

However, our goal is to build a community of developers who will be able to use our solutions, create products that make our world better, and have easy access to explore possible synergies with each other. We envision a community where people are inspired by each other's stories, learn from each other's work, and establish great collaborations that lead to success.

> “I am excited that we are improving not only on the product level, but also in our communication with customers and the community. It has always been our number one priority to be a valuable partner in their journey to success, and clear communication certainly plays an important role in that mission.” Roman Brückner, CTO

Interested in being part of the community? Join the community on Github, feel free to ask any question or even contribute (thanks for that!).

If you haven't experienced the power of JointJS+ yet, you can start a 30-day risk-free trial and play around with the solution yourself.

Frequently asked questions

I am a Rappid customer and have an active license. Do these changes affect me?

No, nothing changes for you. Your license will still be active, available on our customer portal: https://my.jointjs.com. The change of brand does not affect the functionality of the framework.

Are the support terms changing?

No, the conditions remain the same. We still offer Standard and Premium support. More information can be found here: <https://www.jointjs.com/pricing>

Will JointJS still offer the same features?

Yes, this change will not affect the functionality of the open-source JointJS library.

Is JointJS still free?

Of course! JointJS will remain free and will always be our way of giving back to the developer community.

How can I get involved in the community?

We're glad you asked! We're improving the way we use our Github repository. Now, you can join the discussions there, ask any questions or even make a contribution.

‍

Happy diagramming!

The JointJS Team