---
source: https://www.jointjs.com/pricing
generated: 2026-03-18
format: markdown
---

JointJS+ pricing

Our license is sold per developer, making it flexible and easy to scale for projects of any size. Plus, there is no limit to the number of applications, end users, machines, or domains that our license can cover.

We make pricing simple. The Standard plan is offered as a perpetual license (“pay once, use forever”), letting you build unlimited products for unlimited users, deployed on unlimited machines. The Enterprise plan is available as a yearly subscription, with additional benefits tailored for large-scale and custom deployments.

Perpetual standard license for unlimited commercial use with optional annual update subscription to always work with the latest JointJS+ version.

$3,490

Per developer (one-time fee)

/year for updates  
 (optional)

+$1,690

Per developer (1st year free)

BUY NOW

START A 30-DAY TRIAL

Great for small and medium businesses   
Not sure? Wanna know more?  Get in touch

Includes:

Perpetual license with unlimited commercial use

180+ pre-built applications

40+ UI components

Updates for the 1st year for free

Basic support

Coming soon: JointReact+ edition

Enterprise version of JointJS+ with unminified source code, annual SOC 2 Type II reports, premium support, and more—all available through a yearly subscription.

Contact for pricing

get a quote

Ideal for enterprises requiring maximum control

Everything in JointJS+, plus:

Unminified source code

Premium support

Dedicated account manager

Long term support for older versions of JointJS+

Introduction & progress calls with library creators

Library updates & upgrades

Annual SOC 2 Type II reports

Extra: 3 hours of technical consulting or development

Up to 50% discount

Startups, NGOs and educational institutions can apply for better conditions.

Apply now

Perpetual license for unlimited commercial use with optional annual update subscription to always work with the latest JointJS+ version.

$2,990\*

Per developer (one-time fee)

$1,490/year for updates (optional)

Per developer (1st year free)

buy now

start a free trial

Not sure or need a quote? Get in touch.

Includes:

Commercial license

Perpetual with unlimited commercial use (apps, end-users, and machines).

150+ pre-built demos

Ready-to-implement demo apps to speed up your development.

Source code

For the current version of JointJS+ including all demos and UI components.

40+ UI components

A wide range of pre-built diagramming features, components and shapes.

Updates for the 1st year

Free update subscription for one year, charged from the 2nd year onwards.

Basic support

Get help from our top-tier engineers to kickstart your project with ease.

Up to 50% discount and monthly installments

Startups, NGOs and educational institutions can apply for better conditions.

Apply now

\*The listed price applies for SMBs only. To get an enterprise quote, please contact our sales.

we’re here for you

Priority support

Discuss your approach with the creators of JointJS+ and gain confidence in your work.

Premium support

$3,990

per year

Includes:

30 hours of support

1 dedicated top-tier engineer

Average response time 4 hours

subscribe to premium

Standard support

$2,490

per year

Includes:

15 hours of support

1 dedicated top-tier engineer

Average response time 12 hours

subscribe to standarD

Both subscriptions include:

Remote troubleshooting

Online ticketing system

Advice from experts

Guaranteed response time

Conference calls

Expert code review

time-tested solution

Trusted by industry leaders

JointJS+ allowed CELUS to focus all our efforts on developing our core technology, while still providing our users with a great diagramming experience. The library is fast to integrate and comes with a wide set of advanced features out of the box that saved us countless development hours. A great partner to have!

Rui Calsaverini

Engineering Director, CELUS GmbH

JointJS+ was really a great find, as it gave us a great boost in the diagramming frontend of our application. These guys know their business and give you a great support on your development. One of our requirements was to have a BPMN diagram support in our app and they quickly supplied this as a plugin to JointJS+!

José Miguel Gonçalves

Project Manager, Nov Inesc Inovação

The JointJS+ toolkit is the best solution we found as a full fledged diagramming library for the web. The JointJS team has been extremely responsive to our needs and it’s been great to help contribute back to the product throughout our development process.

Kevin Mansel

Senior Software Engineer, Patent Navigation

JointJS+ was the perfect product for us. We have used JointJS+ as the foundation to create an illustration tool for Sales relationships within a target organization. The product has been reliable, flexible, straightforward to integrate, and very easy for end users to understand.

Phil Cederstrom

Chief Technology Officer, Polaris I/O

want to know more?

Frequently asked questions

Find the answers below or get in touch with us.

How does licensing work and how many licenses do I need?

What is the ROI (return on investment) of buying a license?

What’s the content of the license package?

How is the license distributed?

What does the basic support include?

How does the priority support subscription work?

How does the update subscription work?

Can I cancel my support and/or update subscriptions at any time?

What payment methods are supported? Can I pay by PO (purchase order)?

adas

Apply for a discount

Request a discount by filling out the form below. We will conduct a quick background check and get back to you as soon as possible.

adas

Get an Enterprise quote

Fill out the form below to get an Enterprise quote.