---
source: https://www.jointjs.com/react-flow-alternative
generated: 2026-04-02
format: plaintext
---

JointJS, a solution preferred by thousands of developers

Opt for a customizable, feature-rich diagramming library and build professional AI-powered applications with confidence.

start free trial

compare features

3 reasons to choose

JointJS over React Flow

Fast and flexible technology

JointJS uses smart SVG rendering, ensuring blazingly fast performance and giving you complete control over the look-and-feel of your application.

170+ app templates

We provide you with 170+ app demos (including source code) that serve as a boilerplate for your next project.

Feature richness

JointJS offers advanced diagram interactions and a wealth of graph layout algorithms, giving you all the building blocks to create professional visual applications.

Trusted by over 50 000 developers worldwide

Build a professional visual application with ease

Start a 30-day trial and get access to all JointJS+ features and demo applications.

start free trial

comparison

Feature comparison

Integration with all major JavaScript frameworks

Demonstrated integration with React, Angular and Vue.

No restrictions on use of the standard license

Perpetual unlimited commercial use of the license at no extra cost (e.g. based on number of deployed apps, end-users, and/or machines).

Dedicated support available

Private support channel with guaranteed SLAs offered at extra cost.

Easy debugging and testing in production environments

Frontend developers can leverage their usual tools for quick debugging, meaningful testing and easy application of custom CSS.

Virtualization functionality

Ability to handle large number of objects efficiently by rendering only the visible area of the diagram.

Extensive set of UI components

Provides a large collection of reusable diagram components (e.g. element palette, minimap, context menu, tooltip).

Advanced diagram functionality

Advanced tools for working with diagram nodes and edges (e.g. custom highlighters, buttons).

Advanced control interactions

Support for touch events and custom keyboard shortcuts.

Wealth of graph layout algorithms

Support for orgchart, flowchart and force-directed automatic graph layouts.

Variety of export tools

Provides various export options such as PNG, JPEG, SVG or PDF.

BPMN shapes

Offers a collection of pre-made reusable BPMN shape definitions.

VSM shapes

Offers a collection of pre-made reusable VSM shape definitions.

Domain-specific plugins

Export/import BPMN 2.0 XML or Visio VSDX formats.

Detailed API documentation

API documentation provides sufficient technical detail for custom development.

Numerous demos

Offers a rich collection of pre-built demo applications that can be used as templates for your project.

Unlock all JointJS+ features for free

Start a no-obligation 30-day trial and get access to all premium features and plugins.

start free trial

Honest testimonial from

those who considered React Flow

Learn directly from our customers the main reasons why they prefer JointJS.

I worked with JointJS+ on different projects to build graphical editors and it helps me get off the ground quickly. Most of the features that you know from other modern editors, even the more advanced ones, are prebuilt in the framework and can be enabled with just a few lines of code. All other features can be added easily due to the framework‘s open nature. And if you get stuck, they provide excellent technical support where you can get in touch directly with the creators of the framework.

Andreas Mülder

Team Leader, Itemis

Feature highlights

Complete diagramming toolkit

Don't reinvent the wheel. Let us take care of all the math, interactivity and graphics for you. Use a set of pre-built diagramming tools to build an outstanding app while saving months of complex development and avoiding headaches from never-ending code maintenance.

Automatic layouts and link routing

Lay out nodes as an orgchart, flowchart or force-directed graph, and determine link behavior with built-in or custom routers.

Custom SVG or HTML shapes with ports

Provide your own custom shape definitions (including ports) for your diagram nodes using SVG or HTML.

Export/Import, serialisation

Export your diagrams to various formats (PNG, JPEG, SVG, PDF), or use JSON for an easy integration with your database.

Events

Enable user interaction by triggering events on the JointJS paper, or individual elements and links.

Snaplines, element & link tools

Define custom UI to manipulate elements and links via built-in and custom tools, including snaplines, buttons and connect tools.

Property editor and viewer

Keep all your diagram data in one place using the model-view architecture, and edit it via the property editor and viewer component.

Zoom and pan, copy and paste & undo and redo

Enhance your application with core diagram controls without having to create them from scratch.

Element palette

Organize your shapes in the element palette, then drag & drop to the diagram.

compatibility

It works everywhere

Our library is based on a strong HTML5 and SVG foundation that allows it to run seamlessly in all major JavaScript frameworks and modern browsers.

IMPLEMENTATION IN LEADING JAVASCRIPT FRAMEWORKS

Vue

Angular

React

Svelte

Salesforce Lightning

Speed up your development with a powerful library

Leverage a time-tested JavaScript diagramming library using the best of HTML5 and SVG to accelerate your development.

EXPLORE ALL DEMOSGET STARTED FOR FREE