---
source: https://www.jointjs.com/success-stories/silo-team-reduces-development-time-by-40-percent
generated: 2026-04-02
format: plaintext
---

About Silo Team

Silo Team, a Swedish startup, tackles the issue of the high turnover rate among developers which is one of the highest among all occupations, costing companies billions of dollars annually. Studies show that replacing a developer can cost up to twice their annual salary, meaning the replacement of a developer earning $90,000 per year could cost a company up to $180,000.

Through extensive research involving over 400 tech teams, Silo Team identified several systemic issues contributing to this turnover, including chaotic onboarding processes, disorganized knowledge silos, and limited automation. These issues are particularly pressing in today's economic climate, where developers are among a business's most valuable and costly assets.

Silo Team is starting by revolutionizing technical onboarding. Their JointJS-powered onboarding tool streamlines this critical process, ensuring that new developers are seamlessly integrated and productive from the very beginning. It acts as a smart assistant for stakeholders, identifying patterns and trends that impact retention, and providing actionable insights to improve future onboarding experiences.

Challenge

In order to create a visual and interactive timeline for their onboarding tool, Silo Team needed a powerful diagramming solution. Building this functionality in-house was considered, but it quickly became clear that this approach would be incredibly time-consuming and resource-intensive, diverting their focus from other core product functionalities.

Solution

After evaluating several libraries, Silo Team chose JointJS for its robust feature set, high customizability, and seamless integration with Vue and TypeScript. JointJS offered the tools they needed to create an engaging and interactive onboarding timeline without the extensive development time required to build such functionality from scratch.

According to Rasmus Stjernström, CEO of Silo Team, "Implementing JointJS was straightforward, thanks to the comprehensive documentation and support resources available. Our developers were able to quickly customize the pre-built shapes and elements to fit our specific requirements, resulting in a highly interactive and user-friendly timeline. Key features like drag-and-drop functionality, node linking, and dynamic updates enhanced the overall user experience. We saved 40% of development time and created an outstanding new UI thanks to JointJS!"

‍

Result

By using JointJS, Silo Team saved 40% of their development time, allowing them to focus on other critical areas of the product. With the time saved, they dedicated resources elsewhere to continue building their technical onboarding tool and developed advanced templates, significantly enhancing the overall user experience. As a result, their product is now more robust and feature-rich, leading to increased user engagement and satisfaction.

This initial success is just the beginning, as their long-term vision is to expand the platform to cover the entire developer lifecycle, addressing every pain point that negatively impacts retention.

Silo Team reports that JointJS has been instrumental in helping them achieve their business goals. It has proven to be a comprehensive and flexible solution for creating interactive diagrams, enabling Silo Team to deliver a superior onboarding tool for tech teams.